Civilization cannot meet our needs. It can feed us and keep us warm, some of us, for now, though famously this isn’t sustainable. We are consuming the world’s energy faster and faster, heedless of universal law, and eventually our whole great machine will cease to function; it will collapse under its own weight. Civilization as we know it is inevitably doomed. There will be a day when this is undeniable, and there will be billions of people alive on that day and the days which follow it. What will become of them? A whole generation of children will not be sat in school and tranquilized by their devices and fed by the grocery store and heated and watered and materially taken care of and bored to shreds. The half-life we take for granted will no longer be on the table; the glass drains even now. A couple months ago grocery stores where I live had a sugar shortage. A sugar shortage! My social contract promised infinite sugar! It’s the bare fucking minimum! What could be a clearer canary in the coal mine than a drought of cheap and hyper-refined pleasure! Temporary, this time. But the droughts will get longer and harsher. I tell you it is a mathematical fact that one day there will be no more in the tank; the amenities will all be out of order. They will go out of order and we will be frightened, and the men on top will pull a week of sleepless nights and wrestle them back, with no concern for the long run, they will wrestle them back at all costs so we can go on chugging for a little while longer, and their short-term strategy will of course make the situation even worse and less workable and the power will go out again soon, and again they will wrestle it back in even more destructive fashion, but what else are they to do, they can’t just let it collapse, the end of the world is an event of infinite disutility, it is therefore worth postponing at all costs. This at any rate is the essence of their unspoken calculus. And so they will keep hitting the snooze button, though it takes more and more energy to do so each time. And the power will keep going out more and more frequently and it will take more and more energy to wrestle it back and it will require a superhuman and heroic effort to do so the last few times but they will do it, they will find the energy within themselves, out of love, because they do love their children, and want them to be warm and safe, and everything is insignificant compared. But and mark my words there will come a day when all the power goes out and there is no way to get it back, it is simply gone, and there is no wifi, water, electricity, heat, no gas for trans-continental trucks and planes and great freighters to ferry all the goods around. This will inevitably happen on our current course, sooner or later. It is the iceberg in our sights, a fact, implacable.