Humans are meant to live in tribes, so naturally people have tried to make this happen many times. How come it usually fails? 

The most common reason, which I think accounts for most hippie communes etc, is lack of commitment. The hippies mostly stayed individuals; their unions were weak because provisional. As discussed, if you are not absolutely committed, external possibilities will continue to exert a gravitational pull. When things get tough, as they certainly will, you bail.

Most intentional communities in the west these days have embraced this limitation, and make little to no effort to separate themselves from civilization at large. They are essentially rental housing. Everyone has a job outside of the community, and they come home from their job and are tired, and maybe there’s a communal dinner and some hanging out. This is better than nothing — it’s good to have people around, so that social interaction is the default pastime. You shouldn’t have to make plans to see your friends. It should be automatic and always available. Like going on your phone. Nobody makes plans to go on their phone. If hanging out with friends is as easy as going on your phone, you won’t be lonely.

So living in a community with a common area where there will usually be some people to hang out with — this is very good. It is community that people need, not the tribe per se, and a setup like this is perfectly sufficient to meet basic belonging needs. But without commitment, there is no liberation from the constant flux of new faces. The others will come and go. You are all still individuals at the end of the day. Even if _you_ are committed to the community, you have no reason to believe the others are on the same page. It is a classic prisoner’s dilemma. Perhaps you feel a strong bond with your team of coworkers at the moving company, but almost everyone would like a better job, and will eventually take their chances. Work there for a decade and you will watch the tribe be constantly made and unmade around you like a never-ending ship of Theseus time-lapse. This is typical of uncommitted community. It frays. And you tire of introducing yourself and getting always left behind.

A marriage can only work if both partners are committed. A tribe can only work if everyone is all in. Hippie nomads with commitment issues are not a strong foundation for a new cultural paradigm. What is needed is to give up the dream of the individual entirely, and give oneself away. But without a tribe which we know will respond in kind, then we are giving ourselves away for nothing in return. Perhaps this is honourable, but under these conditions it is certainly optimal to be an individual. It is the prisoner’s dilemma. Individualism is a prison.

Getting a bunch of idealistic individuals together will inevitably fail without deep commitment, but it is also possible to fail in the opposite direction. Some groups are so committed to each other that they shut themselves off from the outside world. This too nullifies the possibility of building a true tribe, because a tribe needs a larger ecosystem to relate to.

Separation from the larger network of human activity is as dangerous for tribes as it is for individuals. With no way for energy to flow in or out, the tribe becomes insular, self-recursive, and strange. Meaning cult time. 

Closed systems are prone to stagnation and devolution. All things need a larger network to relate to. Your average agoraphobe becomes paranoid and delusional, and the same is true of communes which become cults. They lose touch with reality. Everything needs to be in relationship with outside, rather than merely talking to itself.

So we have a long history of attempts to create something like a tribe in the modern world. Too much and too little separation from the larger network of culture are both potentially fatal. 

It is therefore of the utmost importance not only to get together into tribes but also to cultivate a local network of tribes held together by the same sort of goodwill and mutual giving that characterizes the tribe itself. Just as the individual human finds their best flourishing in a tribe, so a tribe in today’s world will reach its highest potential in a web of tribes. The pattern is the same: isolated units are weak; to be is to relate to the network. We are made for this.