Consider politics. The matter of organizing our society. I believe that people get so crazy about politics because there is an extreme dissonance between the way things are and the way the human body and mind is programmed to expect things to be. In [[The Tribe]], decisions about the direction and organization of the tribe are a communal matter and are democratic in the truest sense. If your tribe has 100 people, you will have on average 1% of a say in what happens to shape your world. If you feel strongly about an issue, you can speak. A life of communion and sharing with these people will have made you much more confident and capable of expressing yourself than you are now. Your voice will be significant. Your opinions will matter. All of the people that you will need to convince will be right in front of you, and they will know and love you, and be open to being convinced by you–just as you will be open to being convinced by them. Decisions in the tribe are made communally. And people’s minds are shaped for the tribe. You are built to have opinions and to believe that they matter and to do what you can to enact them, in tandem with your people. To live in (for example) a liberal democracy, where almost everyone’s will and spirit is relegated to a statistic and limited to the question of which loathsome stranger is least loathsome–you go crazy! You know that your thoughts and feelings are supposed to actually count! And this extra energy has to come out somehow. Media consumption, virtue signalling, faux protests, angry Thanksgiving.

Extreme dissonance between the way things are and the way the human body and mind is programmed to expect things to be. In the tribe, decisions are made communally and are democratic in the true sense of the term. If you feel strongly about an issue, you can speak. Your opinions matter. All of the people that you need to convince are right in front of you, and they will know and love you, and be open to being convinced by you–just as you will be open to being convinced by them. 

Given that your mind is built for this arrangement, consider the dissonance of living in a modern mass democracy, where your will and spirit towards the direction of your tribe is relegated to one hundred millionth of the question of which loathsome stranger is least loathsome. 
Who could blame you for going nuts? You know in your bones that your thoughts and feelings matter - that they're supposed to make a difference - but nothing in your experience of reality supports this notion. And this extra energy has to come out somehow. Media consumption, virtue signalling, faux protests, angry Thanksgiving.

[[Tribalism - a dirty word]]

The only true democracy is tribal, fractal, direct democracy, where everyone gets a say, not merely a vote. A vote is nothing; there is nothing human in it. Humans are complex; we are creatures of communication. Votes make us into literal bits.

We talk about protecting democracy. So-and-so or such-and-such is 'dangerous to democracy' and democracy needs to be preserved at all costs. If we truly had a democracy it would have no use for this kind of rhetoric. Democracy and freedom of speech are not ends unto themselves in the tribe, they need not be constantly invoked as the pillars of society by pundits and politicians. For in the tribe, these things simply follow. 

The only possible basis for true democracy is a group small enough for everyone to know each other. A self-conscious political organism defining itself anew with every generation, every day, even. The traditions are constantly affirmed, consciously chosen, and so they stay alive.