Meaning merely living together, or meeting up once a week to play pickleball, or for church, or enjoying a strong bond of camaraderie with your coworkers at the moving company, or living in a shared house getting high and playing board games, eventually gathering and dispersing, everyone going off on their own path, hunting for more, a better job, someone to fuck and be alone with, fully comfortable, money, bigger and better things, tired of being broke and breaking your back and balancing the endless expenses of maintaining baseline while wasting all your time, higher commitments on nebulous future wednesday nights, something else, fuller, more complete. You don’t ever give up wanting. It would be irrational to do so, because the others aren’t about to give up wanting. It is a classic [[Ephemeral Community as Prisoner's Dilemma|prisoner's dilemma]].

People do connect over the internet. But it is incomplete. Your body does not truly believe you are interacting with another physical person. Your body believes itself to be alone, and it is alone.

People do live and work together in cities. But there is a classic prisoner’s dilemma at the heart of all civilized cooperation. To be in a tribe is to be all in on the tribe. Committed completely to the people who make up your life. They are your meaning and purpose for a fact and forever. You will see some die and others be born. But your absolute commitment to those around you will be a constant. In civilization, it is possible to outlive all of your friends, but in the tribe, there is the most organic and obvious of systems in place to ensure that you will always be provided new ones; you will always be taken care of.

Issues like the loneliness and insecurity of the elderly (whose loneliness and insecurity is only the endgame or logical conclusion of everyone’s) could in theory be remedied by community events and social safety nets, but I think they are a fundamental corollary of our way of living and are unlikely to be banished by sensible reform. I submit that since every human being has an innate drive to connect to others, if it were possible to create healthy communities within modern cities, it would have been done–or perhaps it was done, in which case it would not have died. Something in the structure of things precludes the realization of our tribal longings. Church is insufficient; discord is insufficient. You Move Me is insufficient, and even Entelechy is insufficient.

Of course one can adapt to their social needs being only partly met. We have all learned to run on a fraction of a tank. But every human reaches their highest potential only in a tribe, where their idiosyncratic genius is affirmed and their flaws are balanced by the diversity of the collective.

In civilization, it is not rational to be all in on any social group or professional team. Because you have no reason to believe that everyone else is all in. People leave. Work at the same company for ten years and you will watch the tribe be made and unmade around you like a never-ending ship of Theseus time-lapse. 

In fact you know for a fact that the others are not all-in. You know for a fact that they are all self-interested individual actors, fending ultimately for themselves. It’s nobody’s fault. This is what we were trained for. At the end of the day, in civilization, besides a marriage and family (and even then, sometimes) relationships are provisional. It is rational to leave the door open for better opportunities, higher fulfillment–which is always associated with leaving the familiar behind. What chance does it have, in the long run, when stacked up against infinite possibility? 

You grow up, move away, or everyone else does. ‘little judases,’ you repress the thought. After all things change. Community is a series of temporary constellations. Gather and disperse. A garden, its face ever changing.

But this garden does not grow any food. Any real food. This is the main reason why it is insufficient to just have some outlet or other for your tribal feelings. It is first of all optional. You are not in it together with these people at the end of the day. You are not navigating this world as a unit. Your survival does not rest on each other’s shoulders. Only you are responsible for yourself, your food and shelter, your comfort, your clean water, your choices. You alone keep yourself warm, at the end of the day. You are responsible for yourself, and no one else. 

Most intentional communities these days are essentially rental housing. Everyone has a job outside, and that’s where they spend most of their time and energy. Places like this can fulfill social and belonging needs, but you are not in it together–it is still on you to make a life for yourself, to pay rent, to figure it out. And it is the nature of civilized work that when you are not doing it, all you want to do is relax. You work at your job and then you come home, and are tired. Plus the endless flow of new faces, which is a given in a place like that–everyone’s just renting–and so even if you find the post-work energy to socialize, those people you put the energy into will be gone soon–but the point is you go to work, and get paid, pay rent, buy food–and none of this has anything to do with the community! So even if you considered the community the meaning of your life, it is not the Content of your life–and you have no reason to believe that anyone else feels the same way. In the long run this dissonance makes itself felt.

A traditional intentional community like Aloha or Entelechy can fulfill social and belonging needs, but it is on you to make a life for yourself. Everyone at Aloha and Entelechy has a job. They work at their job and then they come home, and are tired. Plus the endless flow of new faces, which is a given in a place like that–everyone’s just renting–and so even if you find the post-work energy to socialize, those people you put the energy into will be gone soon–but the point is you go to work, and get paid, pay rent, buy food–and none of this has anything to do with the community! So even if you considered the community the meaning of your life, it is not the Content of your life–and you have no reason to believe that anyone else feels the same way. In the long run this dissonance makes itself felt in many a heart-wrench.

Community is clearly better than none. But cohabitation is not enough. Connection is not enough. There must also be cooperation, and not just cleaning up the kitchen or digging the foundations for a new shed every once in a weekend. The tribe must be co-operating towards the endeavour of life, every day. No day jobs. Life is all days.

A proper tribe is necessary for optimal human flourishing. Not just living together or just working together, but both. Striving together for life. There is a significant difference between being involved with a group of others on one level and being involved with them on every level. Only in the latter case do you stand a chance at selflessness.

A tribe must live together, and it must make a living together.