A society’s true object is the realization of human potential. The strength of a social model consists solely in how much of its people’s potential it is capable of realizing. 

The tribe is built and optimized to facilitate the growth of its members — after all, it is its members. It can’t get away with leaving their potential untapped. If a tribe has 100 people, and 1 does not fully become themselves, does not develop their own innate genius, the tribe is 1 percent weaker. That could make the difference between surviving the winter and oblivion. Over time, evolution dictates that it will make the difference. The cultural traditions which do not foster the full greatness of their members do not last. The cultures which survive are perfectly sculpted channels of human excellence. Our global monoculture is destined for the dustbin of history as long as it leaves infinite potential on the table.

A musical genius may play and inspire the tribe to greater efforts, more perfect union. If their potential is left untapped the tribe is weaker. The boost of motivation they provide may have made the difference in crucial moments. A hunt may fail; frail children, themselves full of great potential, may not survive the winter. The bigger a baby’s brain, the more useless it is, the more energy it takes to keep it alive. But if the tribe is strong enough to support that dead weight, the big-brained child, once it grows into a contributing human, may have an extraordinary potential to realize, and make the tribe even stronger. Perhaps their ingenuity will devise a new and efficient method of trapping rabbits, increasing the tribe’s net food yield for generations to come. There is a clear compounding effect to the comfortable abundance which fosters nurturing and patient cultures. The cultures which cannot provide a safe and affirming container for their people to grow up, experiment, take their time — these cultures are outcompeted, and fail in a hurry. There are ripple effects to underutilizing any given human. Though these are disguised in civilization, they are still present. How many geniuses and potential geniuses were annihilated in the Holocaust? And how many Germans’ higher potentials had to be suppressed in order for it to come to this? How many of their glorious sons died in the first world war, or wasted away in factories? How many of their glorious daughters lost the fire of life in the prescribed mundanity of the housewife? This is a pressure cooker waiting to explode — it was bound to happen sooner or later. And how does our own society measure up? Are we so different? Is that same repressed force not curdling now underneath our own national dream? How many potential leaders and inventors never get a shot, numb themselves with alcohol, and end up abusing their kids, who are in turn stunted? We may ignore this problem, placate the underutilized with consumer goods, but the restless energy of their creative repression does not go away. We do pay all of our costs one way or another.

A genius must be given the chance to play. If they are left to languish on the factory floor, humanity is short a genius. And this has consequences.

So the tribe is not only idealistic but also efficient. Human potential is by all accounts an extraordinarily potent resource. A society pays a massive opportunity cost when relegating even one person to a life of repetitive, mind-numbing labour. Getting the best out of people is the name of the game.

Despite our culture-wide obsession with value and optimization, we seem not to take this most fundamental of challenges very seriously. The Bangladeshi children in sweatshops are clearly not reaching their highest realization, and how much better off are our children in the west, addicted to their iPads?

We put our children through a one-size-fits-all school system which verifiably fits no one. They sit- and listen to stuff they mostly don’t care about, they complete assignments, occasionally they get to play a game. This is so demoralizing as to alienate them from the higher potentials latent within. Then they are thrown headlong into the vast matrix of selfish interests, to fend for themselves as individuals. The loneliness of this mode makes people sick and tired and ineffective, and it makes them unsure of themselves and their place in the world. We have shown how the individual’s place in the world is precisely within the tribe. Even the most unusual, willful, individualist individual will only reach his true flourishing when he is in his proper place, among his tribe. Napoleon, for instance, did not reach his true flourishing — he got drunk on grandeur and died alone. His talents could have been better utilized.

Without a tribe, people rightly feel that they have no place in the world, and so they lose faith in themselves; they have no reason to believe they are worthy. This alone is what permits demeaning, robotic jobs to exist. People do not have self-worth, self-belief, or self-knowledge. Only alone will we accept the assembly line, the coal mine, the cubicle. And these sorts of lives consign their occupants to oblivion. Their potential dies; a liability, it has nowhere to go. If your place in the world is putting the same sticker on the same plastic cylinder over and over and over again every day, then anything beyond that is superfluous. There is no reason for you to become human. The optimal adaptation to life on the assembly line is to kill your higher self and resign yourself completely.

But you do have the seeds of greatness within you. So this is not only a tragedy but also, on the scale of society, woefully inefficient.

The unfolding of the human story is accelerating. There are more prophets, visionaries, and innovators alive today than at any other time in history. We should cultivate the soil that they might bloom.