It is not merely idealistic but also objectively efficient to reorganize society along these lines. To build a civilization of tribes, rather than individuals.

Our economic model holds that the rational individual will act in the market according to their own best interests. Through this vast and endless negotiation, somehow everything gets done. We believe in the market as the imperfect but organic expression of all human intention. Everyone is doing what they can with what they’ve got. There is a great beauty and optimism in this vision.

However, there is a reason why so many people are dissatisfied with it. We would do well to look honestly at the living conditions on the ground, rather than merely reassert the model, imploring the disaffected to take solace in its beauty and optimism. It’s a good story, but you can’t eat it. 

Individuals tend to be weak and desperate. We know in our guts that without a tribe, we are sure to die alone on the unforgiving open plain, and the market is no less hospitable. So the individual lives in survival mode, making decisions for the short term. They need bread now, their children need bread, and so they sell themselves. They have no choice.

This system does not create self-actualized human beings, capable of being rational economic actors in the ever-expanding global market. It creates cheap labour.

The animal fear of the individual precludes the possibility of rational choice. Only humans who _have_ a choice are capable in principle of making a rational choice. The assumptions of our economics are therefore bunk as long as billions must choose between slavery and starvation.

Let us consider the effect on people’s habits when they feel safe, secure, and stable. They first and foremost consume much less crap. Those living paycheque to paycheque, barely getting by, will be much more likely to buy a $30 sweater made from dirt-cheap synthetic fabrics by a child, than a $200 sweater made from wool by an artisan, even if the latter sweater will last ten times longer and is therefore objectively more cost-effective, besides being a better sweater, likely more comfortable, more stylish, will feel better to wear, all before even touching matters of ethics. It is even more efficient from the perspective of society. Ten cheap sweaters in the landfill multiplied by all of the people just getting by making obviously inefficient purchases, and all of the other crap they’re buying and throwing out besides sweaters. This system does not serve the people. It does not even serve itself. It serves whoever can make the cheapest sweater. And that is whoever is willing to stoop the lowest, employ the youngest Bangladeshi child, treat them the poorest, feed them the cheapest excuse for food — which in turn is produced by the man willing to rape and poison the land most expeditiously. In short, the system belongs to the least scrupulous. Those willing and able, through a combination of childhood trauma and sociopathic disposition and abundant incentive, to root out each and every remnant of their humanity. These men are the deepest roots of all of our markets; trace any supply chain to its origin and you will find one of them. They are the rocks upon which our church is built.

Is it not obvious that those Bangladeshi children are enslaved? Well, we don’t like that _word_ anymore, so we toss them a little copper, and we feel alright. But they are of course absolutely dehumanized and have no choice in the matter; they would not endure this if they had other options. 

If they had grown up in tribes, or even traditional villages, they would not deign to work in the sweater sweatshop. No shot. They would have a sense of their intrinsic value, confidence in their abilities to hunt or gather or grow food, and faith in the world to provide for their needs. They would certainly refuse to chain themselves to the machine. And the exact same principle applies in the first world. Nobody would choose to work on the assembly line but for the animal desperation of the isolated. Nobody who truly felt safe and free would choose to be a cashier or insurance agent or telemarketer. To be isolated is to be disempowered. Nobody is responsible for you but you. You are fending for yourself in a world which you cannot make sense of. You don’t have much of a choice. You can find a job and show up, or head to skid row. 

Writes the economist E.F. Schumacher:

> That soul-destroying, meaningless, mechanical, monotonous, moronic work is an insult to human nature which must necessarily and inevitably produce either escapism or aggression, and that no amount of “bread and circuses” can compensate for the damage done — these are facts which are neither denied nor acknowledged but are met with an unbreakable conspiracy of silence — because to deny them would be too obviously absurd and to acknowledge them would condemn the central preoccupation of modern society as a crime against humanity.

Even if free markets are truly the highest possible expression of human will and value, surely these markets are stronger if they are made up of strong tribes and not impotent individuals making decisions out of desperation. Exploitation is simply inefficient. It’s the addict’s mindset in macro— burning human potential for a short-term kick. Our society weakens itself when it makes its members weak. We think we don’t care, but we will be made to care, sooner rather than later.

Only people whose basic needs are met unconditionally will fulfill the assumptions of our economic model. Existing in a felt relationship to the business of survival, they will know what they need, and what it takes to make it happen. They will only take on a job that is truly challenging and interesting, since they can always just work for the tribe — farming, building, caring, entertaining.

This is real human labour, directly productive and genuinely fulfilling. Tribes can take care of themselves; with that baseline, they are strong. Humans in tribes know who they are, what they need, what they’re capable of, how they relate to the world. They are the rational economic agents we have heard so much about. 

Only by systematically disempowering tribes and villages can we create an endless influx of cheap labour into the cities. This is suicidal behaviour on the scale of culture, yet we believe it inevitable and therefore righteous. The indoctrined mind even bristles at this notion that people should have the option of doing real work in their communities, as if this were too good to be true and not the literal bare minimum.

These humans — and they truly deserve the name — feel free to be themselves, to become themselves. And this turns out to be the greatest efficiency of all.