The tribe is like marriage in a few key ways. You must choose it, and keep choosing it. You must not take it for granted. And you must give up the infinite possibility presented by the field. You must not merely resist temptation, but remove yourself from it. Not necessarily physically, but mentally–you must take yourself out of the game. You must decide that what you have is what you are meant to have, and so it is enough, no, it is infinitely more than enough. You must be grateful. You must give up better and more for good. Or rather you must limit yourself–limit your yearnings and strivings towards better and more to the tribe, to its development and evolution. You must limit yourself to what is before you. These are limitations that you choose–just as once you chose to limit yourself to this life within this human body. 

Possibilities of potential love and achievement and satisfaction are infinite. 

The tribe, like your wife, is one choice among infinite. If you fail to choose decisively, to commit your entire being, if you stay trapped in the game at large, falling in love with strangers and pictures of faraway lands–then what you have will remain merely one of many options. And what you have–your tribe, your wife, your life–will be known and banal, its faults and dysfunctions constantly present. If you never choose this particular branch of the tree with everything you got, eventually you will be worn down, and you will escape–since what you have has not merely to compete with one other option, but with the whole sweep of other possible lives, with the infinite itself. Eventually the fantasy of the infinite will overpower your lazy comfort and force of habit–the only thing preventing you from leaving, since you have committed none of your inner essence, only your superficial resources. The sunk cost fallacy is no substitute for true commitment. 

And what can perfect strangers or exotic idylls really give you? They will become banal in their turn. Meanwhile you will grow old adrift, a trillion figs rotting at your feet.

The infinite is no place to make a life. The individual ages poorly.

Therefore, choose with gusto!